library. For example:
Do not forget the trailing "/".
4 
Introduction 
4.1 
Getting Started
This section provides an overview of NWChem input and program architecture, and the syntax used to describe the input.
See 
Simple Input File
 and 
Water Molecule Input
 for examples of NWChem input files with detailed explanation.
NWChem consists of independent modules that perform the various functions of the code. Examples of modules include
the input parser, SCF energy, SCF analytic gradient, DFT energy, etc.. Data is passed between modules and saved for
restart using a disk-resident database or dumpfile (see 
NWChem Architecture
).
The input to NWChem is composed of commands, called directives, which define data (such as basis sets, geometries, and
filenames) and the actions to be performed on that data. Directives are processed in the order presented in the input file,
with the exception of certain start-up directives (see 
Input File Structure
) which provide critical job control information, and
are processed before all other input. Most directives are specific to a particular module and define data that is used by that
module only. A few directives (see 
Top-level Directives
) potentially affect all modules, for instance by specifying the total
electric charge on the system.
There are two types of directives. Simple directives consist of one line of input, which may contain multiple fields.
Compound directives group together multiple simple directives that are in some way related and are terminated with an
END directive. See the sample inputs (
Simple Input File
 and 
Water Molecule Input
) and the input syntax specification (
Input
Format and Syntax for Directives
).
All input is free format and case is ignored except for actual data (e.g., names/tags of centers, titles). Directives or blocks of
module-specific directives (i.e., compound directives) can appear in any order, with the exception of the TASK directive
(see 
Input File Structure
 and 
Tasks
) which is used to invoke an NWChem module. All input for a given task must precede
the TASK directive. This input specification rule allows the concatenation of multiple tasks in a single NWChem input file.
To make the input as short and simple as possible, most options have default values. The user needs to supply input only
for those items that have no defaults, or for items that must be different from the defaults for the particular application. In
the discussion of each directive, the defaults are noted, where applicable.
The input file structure is described in the following sections, and illustrated with two examples. The input format and
syntax for directives is also described in detail.
4.1.
1
 
.nwchemrc for environment variables and libraries
Each user should have a 
.nwchemrc
 file to point to default data files, such as basis sets, pseudopotentials, and MD potentials.
Contents of the default.nwchemrc file based on the above information should be:
% export NWCHEM_BASIS_LIBRARY="$NWCHEM/data-5.0/libraries/" It is can also be useful to use the NWCHEM_BASIS_LIBRARY environment variable when testing a new libraries in your
own directory. This will allow you to overwrite the value of nwchem_basis_library in your .nwchemrc file and point to the
new basis library. For example:
Do not forget the trailing 
"/"
.
4.1.
2
 
Input File Structure
The structure of an input file reflects the internal structure of NWChem. At the beginning of a calculation, NWChem needs
to determine how much memory to use, the name of the database, whether it is a new or restarted job, where to put
scratch/permanent files, etc.. It is not necessary to put this information at the top of the input file, however. NWChem will
read through the entire input file looking for the start-up directives. In this first pass, all other directives are ignored.
The start-up directives are
After the input file has been scanned for the start-up directives, it is rewound and read sequentially. Input is processed
either by the top-level parser (for the directives listed in 
Top-level Directives
, such as TITLE, SET, …) or by the parsers for
specific computational modules (e.g., SCF, DFT, …). Any directives that have already been processed (e.g., MEMORY)
are ignored. Input is read until a TASK directive (see 
Tasks
) is encountered. A TASK directive requests that a calculation be
performed and specifies the level of theory and the operation to be performed. Input processing then stops and the
specified task is executed. The position of the TASK directive in effect marks the end of the input for that task. Processing
of the input resumes upon the successful completion of the task, and the results of that task are available to subsequent
tasks in the same input file.
The name of the input file is usually provided as an argument to the execute command for NWChem. That is, the execute
command looks something like the following
The default name for the input file is 
nwchem.nw
. If an input file name 
input_file
 is specified without an extension, the code
assumes .nw as a default extension, and the input filename becomes 
input_file.nw
. If the code cannot locate a file named
either 
input_file
 or 
input_file.nw
 (or nwchem.nw if no file name is provided), an error is reported and execution terminates. The
following section presents two input files to illustrate the directive syntax and input file format for NWChem applications.
4.1.
3
 
Simple Input File – SCF geometry optimization
A simple example of an NWChem input file is an SCF geometry optimization of the nitrogen molecule, using a Dunning cc-
pvdz basis set. This input file contains the bare minimum of information the user must specify to run this type of problem –
fewer than ten lines of input, as follows:
 nwchem_basis_library <location of NWChem installation>/src/basis/libraries/  
 nwchem_nwpw_library <location of NWChem installation>/src/nwpw/libraryps/  
 ffield amber  
 amber_1 <location of NWChem installation>/src/data/amber_s/  
 amber_2 <location of NWChem installation>/src/data/amber_q/  
 amber_3 <location of NWChem installation>/src/data/amber_x/  
 amber_4 <location of NWChem installation>/src/data/amber_u/  
 spce   <location of NWChem installation>/src/data/solvents/spce.rst  
 charmm_s <location of NWChem installation>/src/data/charmm_s/  
 charmm_x <location of NWChem installation>/src/data/charmm_x/
   % setenv NWCHEM_BASIS_LIBRARY "$NWCHEM/data-5.0/libraries/"
START  
RESTART  
SCRATCH_DIR  
PERMANENT_DIR  
MEMORY  
ECHO
 nwchem input_file Examining the input line by line, it can be seen that it contains only four directives; TITLE, GEOMETRY, BASIS, and TASK.
The TITLE directive is optional, and is provided as a means for the user to more easily identify outputs from different jobs.
An initial geometry is specified in Cartesian coordinates and Angstrøms by means of the GEOMETRY directive. The
Dunning cc-pvdz basis is obtained from the NWChem basis library, as specified by the BASIS directive input. The TASK
directive requests an SCF geometry optimization.
The 
GEOMETRY directive
 defaults to Cartesian coordinates and Angstrøms (options include atomic units and Z-matrix
format). The input blocks for the BASIS and GEOMETRY directives are structured in similar fashion, i.e., name, keyword,
…, end (In this simple example, there are no keywords). The BASIS input block must contain basis set information for
every atom type in the geometry with which it will be used. Refer to 
Basis
 for a description of available basis sets and a
discussion of how to define new ones.
The last line of this sample input file (task scf optimize) tells the program to optimize the molecular geometry by minimizing
the SCF energy. (For a description of possible tasks and the format of the TASK directive, refer to 
Tasks
)
If the input is stored in the file 
n2.nw
, the command to run this job on a typical UNIX workstation is as follows:
NWChem output is to UNIX standard output, and error messages are sent to both standard output and standard error.
4.1.
4
 
Water Molecule Sample Input File
A more complex sample problem is the optimization of a positively charged water molecule using second-order Møller-
Plesset perturbation theory (MP2), followed by a computation of frequencies at the optimized geometry. A preliminary SCF
geometry optimization is performed using a computationally inexpensive basis set (STO-3G). This yields a good starting
guess for the optimal geometry, and any Hessian information generated will be used in the next optimization step. Then the
optimization is finished using MP2 and a basis set with polarization functions. The final task is to calculate the MP2
vibrational frequencies. The input file to accomplish these three tasks is as follows:
 title "Nitrogen cc-pvdz SCF geometry optimization"  
 geometry    
   n 0 0 0  
   n 0 0 1.08  
 end  
 basis  
   n library cc-pvdz  
 end  
 task scf optimize
 nwchem n2
start h2o_freq  
charge 1  
geometry units angstroms  
 O       0.0  0.0  0.0  
 H       0.0  0.0  1.0  
 H       0.0  1.0  0.0  
end  
basis  
 H library sto-3g  
 O library sto-3g  
end  
scf  
 uhf; doublet  
 print low  
end  
title "H2O+ : STO-3G UHF geometry optimization"  
task scf optimize  
basis  
 H library 6-31g**  
 O library 6-31g**  
end  
title "H2O+ : 6-31g** UMP2 geometry optimization"  
task mp2 optimize  
mp2; print none; end  
scf; print none; end  
title "H2O+ : 6-31g** UMP2 frequencies"  
task mp2 freq The START directive (
START/RESTART
 tells NWChem that this run is to be started from the beginning. This directive
need not be at the beginning of the input file, but it is commonly placed there. Existing database or vector files are to be
ignored or overwritten. The entry h2o_freq on the START line is the prefix to be used for all files created by the calculation.
This convention allows different jobs to run in the same directory or to share the same scratch directory
SCRATCH_DIR
/
PERMANENT_DIR
, as long as they use different prefix names in this field.
As in the first sample problem, the geometry is given in Cartesian coordinates. In this case, the units are specified as
Angstrøms. (Since this is the default, explicit specification of the units is not actually necessary, however.) The CHARGE
directive defines the total charge of the system. This calculation is to be done on an ion with charge +1.
A small basis set (STO-3G) is specified for the intial geometry optimization. Next, the multiple lines of the first SCF directive
in the scf …end block specify details about the SCF calculation to be performed. Unrestricted Hartree-Fock is chosen here
(by specifying the keyword uhf), rather than the default, restricted open-shell high-spin Hartree-Fock (ROHF). This is
necessary for the subsequent MP2 calculation, because only UMP2 is currently available for open-shell systems (see
Section 4). For open-shell systems, the spin multiplicity has to be specified (using doublet in this case), or it defaults to
singlet. The print level is set to low to avoid verbose output for the starting basis calculations.
All input up to this point affects only the settings in the runtime database. The program takes its information from this
database, so the sequence of directives up to the first TASK directive is irrelevant. An exchange of order of the different
blocks or directives would not affect the result. The TASK directive, however, must be specified after all relevant input for a
given problem. The TASK directive causes the code to perform the specified calculation using the parameters set in the
preceding directives. In this case, the first task is an SCF calculation with geometry optimization, specified with the input scf
and optimize. (See 
Tasks
 for a list of available tasks and operations.)
After the completion of any task, settings in the database are used in subsequent tasks without change, unless they are
overridden by new input directives. In this example, before the second task (task mp2 optimize), a better basis set (6-
31G**) is defined and the title is changed. The second TASK directive invokes an MP2 geometry optimization.
Once the MP2 optimization is completed, the geometry obtained in the calculation is used to perform a frequency
calculation. This task is invoked by the keyword freq in the final TASK directive, task mp2 freq. The second derivatives of
the energy are calculated as numerical derivatives of analytical gradients. The intermediate energies and gradients are not
of interest in this case, so output from the SCF and MP2 modules is disabled with the PRINT directives.
4.1.
5
 
Input Format and Syntax for Directives
This section describes the input format and the syntax used in the rest of this documentation to describe the format of
directives. The input format for the directives used in NWChem is similar to that of UNIX shells, which is also used in other
chemistry packages, most notably GAMESS-UK. An input line is parsed into whitespace (blanks or tabs) separating tokens
or fields. Any token that contains whitespace must be enclosed in double quotes in order to be processed correctly. For
example, the basis set with the descriptive name modified Dunning DZ must appear in a directive as "modified Dunning
DZ", since the name consists of three separate words.
4.1.
5
.
1
 
Input Format
A (physical) line in the input file is terminated with a newline character (also known as a `return' or `enter' character). A
semicolon (;) can be also used to indicate the end of an input line, allowing a single physical line of input to contain multiple
logical lines of input. For example, five lines of input for the GEOMETRY directive can be entered as follows;
These same five lines could be entered on a single line, as
 geometry  
  O 0  0     0  
  H 0  1.430 1.107  
  H 0 -1.430 1.107  
 end This one physical input line comprises five logical input lines. Each logical or physical input line must be no longer than
1023 characters.
In the input file:
a string, token, or field is a sequence of ASCII characters (NOTE: 
if the string includes blanks or tabs (i.e., white
space), the 
entire string must be enclosed in double quotes).
\
 (backslash) at the end of a line concatenates it with the next 
line. Note that a space character is automatically
inserted at this 
point so that it is not possible to split tokens across lines. A 
backslash is also used to quote special
characters such as 
whitespace, semi-colons, and hash symbols so as to avoid their 
special meaning (NOTE: these
special symbols must be quoted with the 
backslash even when enclosed within double quotes).
;
 (semicolon) is used to mark the end of a logical input line within 
a physical line of input.
#
 (the hash or pound symbol) is the comment character. All 
characters following 
#
 (up to the end of the physical line)
are 
ignored.
If any input line (excluding 
Python programs
 begins 
with the string INCLUDE (ignoring case) and is followed by a valid
file name, then the data in that file are read as if they were 
included into the current input file at the current line. Up to
three levels of nested include files are supported. The user should 
note that inputting a basis set from the standard
basis library 
(
Basis Sets
) uses one level of include.
Data is read from the input file until an end-of-file is detected, 
or until the string EOF (ignoring case) is encountered at
the 
beginning of an input line.
4.1.
5
.
2
 
Format and syntax of directives
Directives consist of a directive name, keywords, and optional input, and may contain one line or many. Simple directives
consist of a single line of input with one or more fields. Compound directives can have multiple input lines, and can also
include other optional simple and compound directives. A compound directive is terminated with an END directive. The
directives START (see 
START/RESTART
) and ECHO (see 
ECHO
) are examples of simple directives. The directive
GEOMETRY (see 
Geometry
) is an example of a compound directive.
Some limited checking of the input for self-consistency is performed by the input module, but most defaults are imposed by
the application modules at runtime. It is therefore usually impossible to determine beforehand whether or not all selected
options are consistent with each other.
In the rest of this document, the following notation and syntax conventions are used in the generic descriptions of the
NWChem input.
a directive name always appears in all-capitals, and in computer 
typeface (e.g., GEOMETRY, BASIS, SCF). Note that
the case of 
directives and keywords is ignored in the actual input.
a keyword always appears in lower case, in computer typeface (e.g., 
swap, print, units, bqbq).
variable names always appear in lower case, in computer typeface, 
and enclosed in angle brackets to distinguish them
from keywords 
(e.g., 
<input_filename>
, 
<basisname>
, 
<tag>
).
$variable$
 is used to indicate the substitution of the value of a 
variable.
()
 is used to group items (the parentheses and other special symbols 
should not appear in the input).
||
 separate exclusive options, parameters, or formats.
[ 
]
 enclose optional entries that have a default value.
< >
 enclose a type, a name of a value to be specified, or a 
default value, if any.
\
 is used to concatenate lines in a description.
...
 is used to indicate indefinite continuation of a list.
 geometry; O 0 0 0; H 0 1.430 1.107; H 0 -1.430 1.107; end An input parameter is identified in the description of the directive by prefacing the name of the item with the type of data
expected, i.e.,
string - an ASCII character string
integer - integer value(s) for a variable or an array
logical - true/false logical variable
real - real floating point value(s) for a variable or an array
double - synonymous with real
If an input item is not prefaced by one of these type names, it is assumed to be of type ``string''.
In addition, integer lists may be specified using Fortran triplet notation, which interprets lo:hi:inc as lo, lo+inc, lo+2*inc, …,
hi. For example, where a list of integers is expected in the input, the following two lines are equivalent
(In Fortran triplet notation, the increment, if unstated, is 1; e.g., 1:3 = 1:3:1.)
The directive 
VECTORS
 is presented here as an example of an NWChem input directive. The general form of the directive
is as follows:
This directive contains three optional keywords, as indicated by the three main sets of square brackets enclosing the
keywords input, swap, and output. The keyword input allows the user to specify the source of the molecular orbital vectors.
There are two mutually exclusive options for specifying the vectors, as indicated by the || symbol separating the option
descriptions;
The first option, 
<string input_movecs default atomic>
, can be used to specify an ASCII character string for the parameter 
input_movecs
.
If no entry is specified, the code uses the default 
atomic
 (i.e., atomic guess). The second option, 
project <string basisname> <string
filename>
, contains the keyword 
project
, which takes two string arguments. When this keyword is used, the vectors in file
<filename>
 will be projected from the (smaller) basis 
<basisname>
 into the current atomic orbital (AO) basis.
The second keyword, 
swap
, can be used to re-order the starting vectors, specifying the pairs of vectors to be swapped. As
many pairs as the user wishes to have swapped can be listed for 
. The optional keywords alpha and beta allow the user to
swap the alpha or beta spin orbitals.
The third keyword, 
output
, allows the user to tell the code where to store the vectors, by specifying an ASCII string for the
parameter 
output_movecs
. If no entry is specified for this parameter, the default is to write the vectors back into either the user-
specified MO vectors input file or, if this is not available, the file 
$file_prefix$.movecs
.
A particular example of the VECTORS directive is shown below. It specifies both the input and output keywords, but does
not use the swap option.
This directive tells the code to generate input vectors by projecting from vectors in a smaller basis named "small basis",
which is stored in the file 
small_basis.movecs
. The output vectors will be stored in the file 
large_basis.movecs
.
The order of keyed optional entries within a directive should not matter, unless noted otherwise in the specific instructions
  7 10 21:27:2 1:3 99  
  7 10 21 23 25 27 1 2 3 99
 VECTORS [input (<string input_movecs default atomic>) || \  
                  (project <string basisname> <string filename>)] \ 
         [swap [(alpha||beta)] <integer vec1 vec2> ...] \ 
         [output <string output_movecs default $file_prefix$.movecs>]
 (<string input_movecs default atomic>) || \ 
                 (project <string basisname> <string filename>) \
 vectors input project "small basis" small_basis.movecs \
         output large_basis.movecs for a particular directive.
4.2 
NWChem Architecture
As described in the 
Getting Started
 section, NWChem consists of independent modules that perform the various functions
of the code. Examples include the input parser, self-consistent field (SCF) energy, SCF analytic gradient, and density
functional theory (DFT) energy modules. The independent NWChem modules can share data only through a disk-resident
database, which is similar to the GAMESS-UK dumpfile or the Gaussian checkpoint file. This allows the modules to share
data, or to share access to files containing data.
It is not necessary for the user to be intimately familiar with the contents of the 
database
 in order to run NWChem.
However, a nodding acquaintance with the design of the code will help in clarifying the logic behind the input requirements,
especially when restarting jobs or performing multiple tasks within one job.
As detailed in the section describing the (
input file structure
), all start-up directives are processed at the beginning of the
job by the main program, and then the input module is invoked. Each input directive usually results in one or more entries
being made in the database. When a TASK directive is encountered, control is passed to the appropriate module, which
extracts relevant data from the database and any associated files. Upon completion of the task, the module will store
significant results in the database, and may also modify other database entries in order to affect the behavior of
subsequent computations.
4.2.
1
 
Database Structure
Data is shared between modules of NWChem by means of the database. Three main types of information are stored in the
data base: (1) arrays of data, (2) names of files that contain data, and (3) objects. Arrays are stored directly in the
database, and contain the following information:
1
. 
the name of the array, which is a string of ASCII characters (e.g., 
"reference energies")
2
. 
the type of the data in the array (i.e., real, integer, logical, or 
character)
3
. 
the number (N) of data items in the array (Note: A scalar is stored 
as an array of unit length.)
4
. 
the N items of data of the specified type
It is possible to enter data directly into the database using the 
SET directive
. For example, to store a (64-bit precision)
three-element real array with the name "reference energies" in the database, the directive is as follows:
set "reference energies" 0.0 1.0 -76.2
NWChem determines the data to be real (based on the type of the first element, 0.0), counts the number of elements in the
array, and enters the array into the database.
Much of the data stored in the database is internally managed by NWChem and should not be modified by the user.
However, other data, including some NWChem input options, can be freely modified.
Objects are built in the database by storing associated data as multiple entries, using an internally consistent naming
convention. This data is managed exclusively by the subroutines (or methods) that are associated with the object.
Currently, the code has two main objects: basis sets and geometries. 
GEOMETRY
 and 
BASIS
 present a complete
discussion of the input to describe these objects.
As an illustration of what comprises a geometry object, the following table contains a partial listing of the database contents
for a water molecule geometry named "test geom". Each entry contains the field test geom, which is the unique name of the
object. Using this convention, multiple instances of objects may be stored with different names in the same database. For
example, if a user needed to do calculations considering alternative geometries for the water molecule, an input file could
be constructed containing all the geometries of interest by storing them in the database under different names.
The runtime database contents for the file h2o.db listed above were generated from the user-specified input directive,
The 
GEOMETRY
 directive allows the user to specify the coordinates of the atoms (or centers), and identify the geometry
with a unique name.
Unless a specific name is defined for the geometry, (such as the name 
"test geom"
 shown in the example), the default name
of geometry is assigned. This is the geometry name that computational modules will look for when executing a calculation.
The SET directive can be used in the input to force NWChem to look for a geometry with a name other than geometry. For
example, to specify use of the geometry with the name 
"test geom"
 in the example above, the SET directive is as follows:
NWChem will automatically check for such indirections when loading geometries. Storage of data associated with basis
sets, the other database resident object, functions in a similar fashion, using the default name 
"ao basis"
.
4.2.
2
 
Persistence of data and restart
The database is persistent, meaning that all input data and output data (calculation results) that are not destroyed in the
course of execution are permanently stored. These data are therefore available to subsequent tasks or jobs. This makes
the input for restart jobs very simple, since only new or changed data must be provided. It also makes the behavior of
successive restart jobs identical to that of multiple tasks within one job.
Sometimes, however, this persistence is undesirable, and it is necessary to return an NWChem module to its default
behavior by restoring the database to its input-free state. In such a case, the 
UNSET
 directive can be used to delete all
database entries associated with a given module (including both inputs and outputs).
5 
Functionalities
5.
1
 
Overview
NWChem provides many methods for computing the properties of molecular and periodic systems using standard quantum
mechanical descriptions of the electronic wavefunction or density. Its classical molecular dynamics capabilities provide for
the simulation of macromolecules and solutions, including the computation of free energies using a variety of force fields.
These approaches may be combined to perform mixed quantum-mechanics and molecular-mechanics simulations.
The specific methods for determining molecular electronic structure, molecular dynamics, and pseudopotential plane-wave
electronic structure and related attributes are listed in the following sections.
Contents of RTDB h2o.db  
-----------------------  
Entry                                   Type[nelem]  
---------------------------  ----------------------  
geometry:test geom:efield             double[3]      
geometry:test geom:coords             double[9]      
geometry:test geom:ncenter               int[1]      
geometry:test geom:charges            double[3]      
geometry:test geom:tags                 char[6] 
...
 geometry "test geom"  
   O     0.00000000    0.00000000    0.00000000 
   H     0.00000000    1.43042809   -1.10715266 
   H     0.00000000   -1.43042809   -1.10715266  
 end
set geometry "test geom"