Using this convention, multiple instances of objects may be stored with different names in the same database. For
example, if a user needed to do calculations considering alternative geometries for the water molecule, an input file could
be constructed containing all the geometries of interest by storing them in the database under different names.
The runtime database contents for the file h2o.db listed above were generated from the user-specified input directive,
The 
GEOMETRY
 directive allows the user to specify the coordinates of the atoms (or centers), and identify the geometry
with a unique name.
Unless a specific name is defined for the geometry, (such as the name 
"test geom"
 shown in the example), the default name
of geometry is assigned. This is the geometry name that computational modules will look for when executing a calculation.
The SET directive can be used in the input to force NWChem to look for a geometry with a name other than geometry. For
example, to specify use of the geometry with the name 
"test geom"
 in the example above, the SET directive is as follows:
NWChem will automatically check for such indirections when loading geometries. Storage of data associated with basis
sets, the other database resident object, functions in a similar fashion, using the default name 
"ao basis"
.
4.2.
2
 
Persistence of data and restart
The database is persistent, meaning that all input data and output data (calculation results) that are not destroyed in the
course of execution are permanently stored. These data are therefore available to subsequent tasks or jobs. This makes
the input for restart jobs very simple, since only new or changed data must be provided. It also makes the behavior of
successive restart jobs identical to that of multiple tasks within one job.
Sometimes, however, this persistence is undesirable, and it is necessary to return an NWChem module to its default
behavior by restoring the database to its input-free state. In such a case, the 
UNSET
 directive can be used to delete all
database entries associated with a given module (including both inputs and outputs).
5 
Functionalities
5.
1
 
Overview
NWChem provides many methods for computing the properties of molecular and periodic systems using standard quantum
mechanical descriptions of the electronic wavefunction or density. Its classical molecular dynamics capabilities provide for
the simulation of macromolecules and solutions, including the computation of free energies using a variety of force fields.
These approaches may be combined to perform mixed quantum-mechanics and molecular-mechanics simulations.
The specific methods for determining molecular electronic structure, molecular dynamics, and pseudopotential plane-wave
electronic structure and related attributes are listed in the following sections.
Contents of RTDB h2o.db  
-----------------------  
Entry                                   Type[nelem]  
---------------------------  ----------------------  
geometry:test geom:efield             double[3]      
geometry:test geom:coords             double[9]      
geometry:test geom:ncenter               int[1]      
geometry:test geom:charges            double[3]      
geometry:test geom:tags                 char[6] 
...
 geometry "test geom"  
   O     0.00000000    0.00000000    0.00000000 
   H     0.00000000    1.43042809   -1.10715266 
   H     0.00000000   -1.43042809   -1.10715266  
 end
set geometry "test geom" 5.
2
 
Molecular Electronic Structure
Methods for determining energies and analytic first derivatives with respect to atomic coordinates include the following:
Hartree-Fock (RHF, UHF, high-spin ROHF)
Gaussian orbital-based density functional theory (DFT) using many 
local and non-local exchange-correlation potentials
(LDA, LSDA)
second-order perturbation theory (MP2) with RHF and UHF references
complete active space self-consistent field theory (CASSCF).
Analytic second derivatives with respect to atomic coordinates are available for RHF and UHF, and closed-shell DFT with
all functionals.
The following methods are available to compute energies only:
iterative CCSD, CCSDT, and CCSDTQ methods and their EOM-CC 
counterparts for RHF, ROHF, and UHF references
active-space CCSDt and EOM-CCSDt approaches
completely renormalized CR-CCSD(T), and CR-EOM-CCSD(T) correction to 
EOM-CCSD excitation energies
locally renormalized CCSD(T) and CCSD(TQ) approaches
non-iterative approaches based on similarity transformed 
Hamiltonian: the CCSD(2)T and CCSD(2) formalisms.
MP2 with RHF reference and resolution of the identity integral 
approximation MP2 (RI-MP2) with RHF and UHF
references
selected CI with second-order perturbation correction.
For all methods, the following may be performed:
single point energy calculations
geometry optimization with constraints (minimization and transition 
state)
molecular dynamics on the fully ab initio potential energy surface
automatic computation of numerical first and second derivatives
normal mode vibrational analysis in Cartesian coordinates
ONIOM hybrid calculations
Conductor-Like Screening Model (COSMO) calculations
electrostatic potential from fit of atomic partial charges
spin-free one-electron Douglas-Kroll calculations
electron transfer (ET)
vibrational SCF and DFT.
At the SCF and DFT level of theory various (response) properties are available, including NMR shielding tensors and
indirect spin-spin coupling.
5.
3
 
Quantum Mechanics/Molecular Mechanics (QM/MM)
The QM/MM module in NWChem provides a comprehensive set of capabilities to study ground and excited state properties
of large-molecular systems. The QM/MM module can be used with practically any quantum mechanical method available in
NWChem. The following tasks are supported
single point energy and property calculations excited states calculation
optimizations and transition state search
dynamics
free energy calculations.
5.
4
 
Pseudopotential Plane-Wave Electronic Structure
The NWChem Plane-Wave (NWPW) module uses pseudopotentials and plane-wave basis sets to perform DFT
calculations. This method's efficiency and accuracy make it a desirable first principles method of simulation in the study of
complex molecular, liquid, and solid-state systems. Applications for this first principles method include the calculation of
free energies, search for global minima, explicit simulation of solvated molecules, and simulations of complex vibrational
modes that cannot be described within the harmonic approximation.
The NWPW module is a collection of three modules:
PSPW (PSeudopotential Plane-Wave) A gamma point code for calculating 
molecules, liquids, crystals, and surfaces.
Band A band structure code for calculating crystals and surfaces 
with small band gaps (e.g. semi-conductors and
metals).
PAW (Projector Augmented Wave) a gamma point projector augmented 
plane-wave code for calculating molecules,
crystals, and surfaces.
These capabilities are available:
constant energy and constant temperature Car-Parrinello molecular 
dynamics (extended Lagrangian dynamics)
LDA, PBE96, and PBE0, exchange-correlation potentials (restricted 
and unrestricted)
SIC, pert-OEP, Hartree-Fock, and hybrid functionals (restricted and 
unrestricted)
Hamann, Troullier-Martins, Hartwigsen-Goedecker-Hutter 
norm-conserving pseudopotentials with semicore corrections
geometry/unit cell optimization, frequency, transition-states
fractional occupation of molecular orbitals for metals
AIMD/MM capability in PSPW
constraints needed for potential of mean force (PMF) calculation
wavefunction, density, electrostatic, Wannier plotting
band structure and density of states generation
5.
5
 
Molecular Dynamics
The NWChem Molecular Dynamics (MD) module can perform classical simulations using the AMBER and CHARMM force
fields, quantum dynamical simulations using any of the quantum mechanical methods capable of returning gradients, and
mixed quantum mechanics molecular dynamics simulation and molecular mechanics energy minimization.
Classical molecular simulation functionality includes the following methods:
single configuration energy evaluation
energy minimization
molecular dynamics simulation
free energy simulation (MCTI and MSTP with single or dual 
topologies, double-wide sampling, and separation-shifted
scaling). The classical force field includes the following elements:
effective pair potentials
first-order polarization
self-consistent polarization
smooth particle mesh Ewald
twin-range energy and force evaluation
periodic boundary conditions
SHAKE constraints
constant temperature and/or pressure ensembles
dynamic proton hopping using the Q-HOP methodology
advanced system setup capabilities for biomolecular membranes.
6 
Top-level Directives
6.
1
 
Overview
Top-level directives are directives that can affect all modules in the code. Some specify molecular properties or other data
that should apply to all subsequent calculations with the current database. However, most top-level directives provide the
user with the means to manage the resources for a calculation and to start computations. As the first step in the execution
of a job, NWChem scans the entire input file looking for start-up directives, which NWChem must process before all other
input. The input file is then rewound and processed sequentially, and each directive is processed in the order in which it is
encountered. In this second pass, start-up directives are ignored.
The following sections describe each of the top-level directives in detail, noting all keywords, options, required input, and
defaults.
START/RESTART
PERMANENT_DIR
SCRATCH_DIR
MEMORY
ECHO
TITLE
PRINT / NOPRINT
SET
UNSET
STOP
TASK
ECCE_PRINT
7 
Geometries
7.
1
 
Overview
The GEOMETRY directive is a compound directive that allows the user to define the geometry to be used for a given